LIST       -  Shareware MS-DOS file viewing program,

    LOOKFOR    -  Shareware boolean text search program. 

Print versions of The Online World

The Online World does not cover any specific area of the world. 
Local versions will be printed and published in several countries 
through joint venture partners. These versions of the book will be 
adapted to local conditions, and contain many local examples and 
references. 

The following local version of the book is available:

  "Ut i verden fra egen skjerm," Norwegian text, Dataforlaget A/S, 
  1992. 220 pages. Phone: +47 22 63 61 62.  Fax: +47 22 63 60 09.
  Price: NOK 245,-.  ISBN: 82-90628-67-6.

Local language versions of the book are due be published soon by 
partners in Denmark and Germany. For information, please contact: 

    Claus Berg (Denmark)      at Claus_Berg@SKOLE-KOM.UNI-C.DK
    Publisher: Teknisk Forlag A/S, Skelbaekgade 4, 1780 Kbh.V., 
    Denmark. Fax: +45 31 21 09 83.

    Dr. Karl Sarnow (Germany) at karl@dadoka.h.ni.schule.de
    Publisher: Verlag Heintz Heise GmbH & Co KB, Helstorfer
    Strasse 7, D-3000 Hannover 61, Germany.
    Fax: +49-511-53 52-129.

Do you want to be a partner? 

If you are interested in becoming the author of a local language 
version of the book in your country, please write me at 
opresno@extern.uio.no to discuss the possibility of a joint-
venture. 


Saltrod (Norway), September 1, 1993

    Yours,

    Odd de Presno



The Online World book's text on paper, disk and in any other 
electronic form is (C) copyrighted 1993 by Odd de Presno. All 
rights reserved worldwide. 


INDEX
=====

PREFACE

1. Going online will make me rich, right?
   Knowledge is Power. A larger personal network gives you a stronger
   punch. The value of information, and of having a great time. . .

2. The online world
   The structure and content of the online offerings. About
   Bulletin Board systems, discussion lists, conferencing systems,
   and online data bases. About packet data services, and network 
   services like FidoNet, i-Com, Infonet, Internet, and others. 
   A constantly changing environment.


3. How to use online services
   Short introduction. How to use menus, and how to navigate like 
   an expert. Tailoring online services to your interests and needs.

4. Hobbies, games, and fun
   About computer programs, online adventure games, threatening viruses,
   planning holidays, collecting coins and stamps, genealogy, music,
   shopping and other leisure activities.

5. Home, education, and work
   Tips for house owners, for those more concerned about money, about
   education and the exchange of knowledge, electronic conferences.
   Building a personal network. Job hunting by modem, and about
   working from home.

6. Your personal healthnet
   About support for diseases like AIDS, cancer, and kidney diseases.
   Forums for people with physical or mental disabilities, like
   hearing impairments, learning disabilities, vision impairment, 
   mobility problems.

7. Electronic mail, telex, and fax
   How to communicate globally at a ridiculously low cost, with
   notes about how to address your global electronic mail. 

8. Free expert assistance
   How to get free advice about your computer, software and
   other things.

9. Your electronic daily news
   Read national and global news before getting it through the 
   traditional media. Get those interesting background facts. 
   Read special interest news that the media never bother to print.

10. Looking for a needle in a bottle of hay
    Notes about searching data bases. How to locate interesting 
    books and articles. 

11. Getting an edge over your competitor 
    Using the networks to manage projects. Monitor competitors, 
    prospects, suppliers, markets, technologies, and trends. 
    Marketing and sales by modem.

12. Practical tips
    How to get more out of the time spent online.

13. Cheaper and better communications
    Using packet data services or competing data 
    transport services like Tymnet Outdial, Infonet,
    Internet, PC Pursuit, and others.

14. Keep what you find.
    Build your local personal data base. Strategies for
    locating interesting information. What separates good
    from bad information.

15. You pay little for a lot!
    How to figure out costs. 

16. Automatic communication
    Get a lead on your competitors.
    Avoid duplication of effort.
    Reduce costs.
    Reduce boring repetitive work.
    No need to remember all the "tricks" of communications 
    anymore. 

17. Gazing into the future.
    Thoughts about things to come.


Appendices:

1. List of selected online services
2. How to get started
   About your personal computer, modem and
   communications program.
3. Your first online trip
   Getting started. Typical pitfalls and 
   simple solutions. Down- and uploading.
4. Explanation of some frequently used terms
5. Books and articles for further reading
6. International standard country codes
7. About the author
8. How to register


Chapter 1: Going online will make me rich, right?
=================================================

The number of services is enormous. It takes time to find the 
truly interesting stuff.
- Knowledge is power.
- A large personal network gives you a punch.
- The value of information, and of having a good time.

Knowledge is Power

My wife has a rare and dangerous kidney disease. One day her doctor
joined us on an online research session to look for experiences and 
advice in other countries. 
    We sat down in my office in Norway. I turned on my personal 
computer and started a communications program. 
    After some keypresses, we could hear the attached modem dial 
the number of CompuServe, a North American information utility. (A 
modem is a piece of equipment that converts computer signals to and 
from sound codes, so that data can be sent by phone.) 
    It took just a few seconds to make the connection. Soon, a 
greeting scrolled over our screen, followed by a menu of available 
choices. 

    For an introduction to practical telecommunications, check out 
    appendix 2 and 3. Appendix 1 lists major services mentioned in 
    this book. 

We selected "Health" and the "Data Base for Rare diseases." This 
gave the address of an American foundation for "cysts in kidneys," 
which is the name of her disease. My wife made contact, and has 
since received regular reports of research results and experiences 
gained in the field.
    We sent an open request for help to an electronic forum for 
doctors. The result was several useful responses. We searched a 
magazine data base for medical articles containing the key word 
"kidney." Paper copies of the most interesting finds arrived by 
mail after a few days. My wife gave them to her hospital doctor as 
background reading. 
    Kenya Saikawa is paralyzed. He communicates with his PC and 
modem using light key strokes and Morse code. Online communications 
allows Kenya to be in regular contact with people outside the walls 
of his Tokyo hospital. 
    We met online in a "Handicap Club" on a computer center called 
TWICS in Tokyo. He was there to exchange experiences with others 
with disabilities. The club is a personal support group for those 
in need of help. 
    CompuServe's Cancer Forum has a similar function. "It's a 
blessing that I can visit here 24 hours a day," one visitor said. 
"When I'm unable to sleep at night, I often sit down by the PC to 
read and write messages to others." 
    The forum is like a family. The file library is full of 
information about cancer. Members can just go in there and pick 
up whatever they want to read. 
    Dave Hughes from Old Colorado Springs, Colorado in the United 
States has had a long career as a professional soldier. He has 
fought in places like the Yalue river in Korea and Vietnam's 
jungle. When he retired, he became a political online force. 
    "I'm using the new tools of the individual mind to change the 
world," he says. Native American Indians are among those, who 
have benefited from Dave's energy and knowledge. He has helped them 
show their culture to the outside world in a graphical form. 
    Vladimir Makarenkov from the Crimea in the Ukraine is manager 
in a company called VINKO. In early 1993, he distributed an offer 
of partnership with foreign companies through the mailing list E-
EUROPE. VINKO is into aluminium processing. He wrote: 
    "From our own production we can offer some one metals and 
aniline dye for cotton, viscose, wool, silk, leather. We are 
interested in deliveries of chemical production (gamma acid, H-
acid) and not quickly deteriorating foods (food concentrates, 
canned food etc)."
    George Pavlov is Planning and Reporting manager at an American 
computer manufacturer. Daily, he logs on to online services to 
monitor industry product announcements and daily news from several 
electronic sources. It helps him stay ahead of rapid technological 
developments. 
    Semafor A/S in Arendal, Norway, produces modems and other types 
of telecommunications equipment. They operate an electronic bulletin 
board for customers, users and prospects. Anybody can call in to 
get information about products and offerings. If they need help, 
they can leave a message to Semafor A/S day and night. A response 
will be waiting for them, when they call back. 
    Eduardo Salom heads Software Plus SA in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. He discovered the online world in 1988, and uses it to 
find information that can help his company develop industrial 
applications. 
    The Norwegian civil engineer Kai Oestreng regularly calls 
specialized online computer clubs to discuss his computational 
needs, fetch programs and monitor developments. 
    Mary Lou Rebelo was born in southern Brazil. Today, she is 
married to a Japanese and lives in Tokyo. She teaches Portuguese 
and works as a translator. The modem enables her to keep in touch 
with others around the world interested in Portuguese and Spanish 
language and culture. 
    Mike Wright teaches at St. Andrew's College in Grahamstown, 
South Africa. He integrates the online world in his teaching to 
motivate his students. His classes are involved in international 
projects with schools all over the globe. 
    In August 1991, the "Old Stalinists" made a coup d'etat in the 
Soviet Union. The news media were silenced, but they forgot the  
country's many bulletin boards. Early one morning, a foreign caller 
picked up the following messages from a Moscow BBS: 


  From:    Valery Koulkov                         
  To:      All                                    Msg #560, 00:42am 
  20-Aug-91
  Subject: Moscow, August 19, 23:00

  Some news from the square news RSFSR white building, 23:00. Local 
  inhabitants are very welcome for the people guarding 'white 
  building', they carry food and some garments to the square. 
  Approx. 8 tanks stand by the house under the RSFSR flags! There is 
  an information that 'white house' is surrounded by the soldiers 
  from Vysshee Desantnoye uchilische from Ryazan. The people are not 
  so desperate than some hours ago. There are more and more people. 


  From:    Stas Stas                              
  To:      Alexey Zabrodin                        Msg #562, 02:53pm 
  20-Aug-91
  Subject: Russia In Agency news

  I have sent two files RIA4.txt & ria5.txt
  It's msgs of Russia Information Agency
  Spread it as much as you can!!!


  From:    Andrew Brown                           
  To:      All                                    Msg #563, 06:31pm 
  20-Aug-91
  Subject: What's happening?

  I am a journalist on the London Daily newspaper *The Independent*, 
  and I am trying to discover whether this technology, like fax 
  machines, is being used for independent communication now that the 
  censors have clamped down on everything else. 

  Can people describe what is happening, and what they see? 
  Something similar was done on Compuserve during the Gulf War, by 
  subscribers who where in Israel and were able to describe Scud 
  missile attacks without censorship. 

  Andrew Brown


  Select: 564
  From:    Valery Koulkov                         
  To:      All                                    Msg #564, 00:52am 
  21-Aug-91
  Subject: Moscow events

  There is shooting near the American embassy and RSFSR state 
  building. Informer said (by phone) that he saw several victims 
  (shot and killed under the tanks. there is fire near the RSFSR 
  building. Moscow, August 21, 1:15 am 

Telecommunications played a role in this historic event. While CNN 
televised the coup, it was not the images, but the words of men 
like Yeltsin that held sway for Russian citizens. 
    Within hours of Yeltsin's statement in defiance of the coup 
leaders, handbills reproducing his statement papered the walls of 
the Moscow metro and Leningrad houses. 

You can!

Online communication is not just for the privileged or those with a 
special interest in computers. It is for you, me, everybody.
    There is much to learn in the "online land," and the medium is 
fascinating. It makes learning fun. You can learn about how to use 
your computer, about your profession, other people's views about 
whatever, and more. Often, you will find reports about experiences 
and know-how that it is hard or impractical to get in other ways. 
    Some users go online to learn how to do things better. Teachers 
want to give their students a better and more motivating learning 
environment. Architects, engineers and companies want increased 
competitiveness and sales. They seek timely information about 
competitors, technologies and tools, partners and trends. 
    You can take a Masters Degree in Business Administration while 
sitting in front of your computer at home. You can join online 
seminars arranged by local or foreign educational institutes. You 
can even study at night, when the rest of your family has calmed 
down. 
    Some build their own educational programs supported by data 
bases, online forums and associations of various kinds. 
    You may feel helpless when in hospital, or when visiting your 
doctor. Knowledge about your disease will make you better equipped 
to handle the situation. The online resource is just keypresses 
away, and knowledge is power. 
    To get this power, you'll need to know what you can get from 
the online world. This book is filled with examples of what is 
available, and practical tips about how to use the offerings.

A large personal network gives strength

Most of us belong to one or several networks. They consist of 
persons that you can call on whenever you need help. Your network 
may be private, like in your family. You may be member of various 
associations, or be part of a group of people with common interests 
within a company or organization. 
    The modem allows you to be part of more personal networks than 
you can possibly cope with in the "real world." Besides, it's much 
easier to develop personal networks in the online world. 
   We have used words like "clubs" and "associations." By this we 
mean groups of people interested in helping You and in participating 
in what You happen to be interested in. 
    Today's communications technology lets us participate in 
networks in other countries at a very low cost. Many describe it as 
participation "beyond time and space." 
    Write a message and send it to a person in your network. It 
arrives in his/her "mailbox" within minutes (sometimes seconds) 
and stays there until the recipient wants to read it. This built-in 
ability to send messages to other people's electronic mailboxes 
reduces the power that time and geographical distances have over 
our lives. 
    A friend in a remote country gets out of bed nine hours after
you, but keeps going well into what, for you, is the next morning. 
No problem. You can send letters when you're awake and receive 
replies when you're asleep. 
    You can pick up and read your friend's messages the next day or 
whenever you feel like doing it. That is how two people as far 
apart as Arendal, Norway and Beijing, China could be involved in 
the development of this book. 
    Sometimes "real time" discussions are important. Consider the 
following example. CompuServe has a Diabetes Forum. You can call 
there any time, day or night, seven days a week. Whenever you feel 
like it. You will always find someone to chat with who understands 
and shares your problems. 
    Real-time chatting may become expensive, but you are free to 
decide your level of involvement. If you think that $10 spent is 
enough, then just stop there. 

What is the point?

Thousands of commercial and noncommercial online services offer 
over 5,000 online databases. These infobases are repositories of 
electronic information. They contain full-text and reference books, 
magazines, newspapers, radio and TV shows, reports, and more. 
    In 1992, BiblioData (USA) found that around 4,000 titles (i.e., 
magazines, newspapers, etc.) were available online in full-text. 
You will find facts and figures about almost anything in the online 
world. 
    The world has over 100,000 public bulletin board systems 
(1993). Most are small information centers, running on personal 
computers using a simple computer program and modems. People call 
in to read messages and information, retrieve free software, or 
just to have a good time. 
    Most BBSes are free. Some charge a small annual fee. The 
largest board has 213 telephone lines, seven gigabytes of storage 
for letters, conferences, computer programs, and more (1993). 
    Mind you, 7 gigabytes is a lot. It is equivalent to more than 
7,000,000,000 characters, or a whopping 12,000 copies of this 
book!
    The entrepreneur sees the online world as a new, profitable 
playground. Many of them have made it their profession to search 
for information for others, and they earn a good living doing so. 
    Others advertise and sell products and services by modem. 
Some set up their own online services to sell knowledge and know-
how, be it of aqua culture, wine production, marketing, or about 
the petroleum offshore market. 
    In business, it pays to be one step ahead of the competition.
Early warnings of customers' needs, competitors' moves, and 
emerging opportunities can be turned into fortunes. It can reduce 
potential losses and help develop businesses in more profitable 
directions. 
    Turn this to your advantage. Build your own early warning 
system that monitors online information sources and networks. 

Have fun 

The online world has an abundance of joke clubs, dramatic adventure 
games with multiple players, and large archives filled with computer 
game software. You can transfer these programs to your personal 
computer and be ready to play in minutes. 
    Others may feel more entertained when things get "interesting." 
Surely, those calling Moscow in August 1991 for news about the coup 
must have had a strange sensation in the stomach. 
    Some online users react quickly when dramatic events occur. 
They go online to read the news directly from the wires, from 
Associated Press, TASS, Reuters, Xinhua Press, Kyodo News and 
others. 
    Usually, the online news is coming directly to you from the 
journalists' keyboards. Often, you heard it here first. 
    Other people prefer to socialize. They meet in online "meeting 
places" to debate everything from Africa and the administration of 
kindergartens to poetry, LISP programming and compressed video for 
multimedia applications. 
    It has been claimed that increased use of online networking in 
a country can effect social changes within politics, economics, 
communication and science. It can support democratic tendencies, 
the transition to a market economy, the formation and support of 
businesses, the spreading of interpersonal and mass communication, 
the forging of invisible colleges among scientists, and breaking-up 
of traditional and closed information systems developed in some 
societies. 
    No matter whether your application is useful or just a pastime, 
online services queue up to help give your life a better content. 
    Some people fear that language might be a problem, and in 
particular if English is not their first language. Don't worry. You 
are in the driver's seat. If something is hard to understand, just 
log off to study the difficult text. Take your time. Nobody is 
watching. 
    Will you being member of the online world make you rich? 
Probably not. On the other hand, it most certainly provides the 
opportunities to help you achieve such a goal, no matter how you 
define the word "rich." 

Chapter 2: The online world
===========================

This chapter is about the structure and contents of the online 
world. You will read about Bulletin Board systems, discussion 
lists, conferencing systems, online data bases, packet data 
services, and network services like FidoNet, i-Com, Infonet, 
and the Internet. 

From papyrus to bits and bytes

Around 1500 B.C., the world's first library was established in Tell 
el Amaran, Egypt. Eight hundred years later, the first public 
library opened in Athens, Greece. 
    It took another two thousand years for the computer to be 
invented. The first known mention of a possible future online 
information service was printed in the Atlantic Monthly magazine in 
1945. 
    Nine years later, the Naval Ordinance Test Station opened their 
online search service in California (U.S.A.) The first full-text 
database came six years later. MEDLARS was a bibliographic database 
containing references to medical literature. From now on, things 
started to roll at a faster pace: 

    * In 1972, DIALOG (U.S.A.) opened their Educational Resources 
      Information Center and National Technical Information Service 
      databases for online searching. (Appendix 1 contains infor-
      mation about the major online services referred to in this
      book.) 
    * In 1974, Dow Jones News/Retrieval (U.S.A.) launched a 
      financial information service for stock brokers. 
    * In 1978, the first bulletin board was put into operation in 
      Chicago (U.S.A.). 
    * CompuServe (U.S.A.) launched a service for home users in 
      1979. 

The online world was born in the United States. Little happened in 
the rest of the world until the late 1980s. American companies and 
users still dominate, but they are no longer alone. 
    Today, we can access over 5,000 public databases. They are 
available from more than 500,000 online systems ("host computers") 
all over the world. 
    With so many online services, it is difficult to find our way 
through the maze of offerings. This book therefore starts with a
map of the online world. 

The structure and contents of the online world

The online world can be described as a cake with multiple layers, 
where the information sources are the bottom layer. You - the user 
- are the marzipan figure on the top. The online world contains the 
following tiers: 

   (1) Database producers and information providers
   (2) Online service companies
   (3) Gateways and networks
   (4) The services 
   (5) The user interface
   (6) The data transport services
   (7) The User.

1. Database producers and information providers.

I have a bulletin board system in Norway (at +47 370 31378). My BBS 
is running on a small personal computer, and offers shareware and 
public domain software. 
    Anybody can call my board to have programs transferred to their 
personal computers by modem (see appendix 2 for how to do this). 
    When you call this BBS to "download" a free program for to your 
computer's hard disk, don't expect to find one made by me. I don't
write programs. All available programs have been written by others. 
    When you call Data-Star in Switzerland, or CompuServe in the 
U.S. to read news, you may find some stories authored by these 
companies. Most of their news, however, are written by others. 
    InfoPro Technologies delivers Russian scientific and technical 
articles from "Referativnyi Zurnal" through online services like 
Orbit, Pergamon and BRS. InfoPro is not the originator. The text 
has been prepared by VINITI (the Institute for scientific and 
technical information of the xUSSR). 
    My BBS (the "Saltrod Horror Show"), Data-Star, NIFTY-Serve, 
Orbit, Pergamon, BRS, and CompuServe are online services. We call 
those who have provided the news and information on these services 
for information providers or database producers. 
    The American news agency Associated Press is an information 
provider. They write the news, and sell them to online services 
like Dialog, CompuServe, Nexis and NewsNet. These online services 
let you read the news by modem.
    The information providers sell the right to distribute their 
news. Your news reading charges may be imbedded in the online 
service's standard access rates. Some services will ask you to pay 
a surcharge when reading news. 
    Most subscribers pay US$12.80 per hour (1993) to use CompuServe 
at 2400 bits per second (bps). At this speed, you typically receive 
around 240 characters of news per second. If you access at higher 
speeds, you will have to pay more. 
    CompuServe pays Associated Press part of what they earn each 
time you read their news. There is no surcharge for reading AP news 
on this service. 
    Others charge more. To read Mid-East Business Digest through 
NewsNet, you pay a surcharge of US$72.00 per hour at 2400 bps 
(1993). Scanning newsletter headlines and conducting keyword 
searches are cheaper. You pay the the basic connect charge, which
 is US$90.00 per hour at this speed. 
    Thus, your total cost for reading Mid-East Business Digest 
amounts to US$2.70 per minute. 
    CompuServe's database service IQuest lets you search NewsNet 
through a gateway to find and read the same articles. Here, reading 
will only set you back US$21.50/hour (provided the articles are 
among the first hits in your search). 
    Many information providers also distribute information through 
grassroots bulletin boards. The Newsbytes News Network and the USA 
Today newsletter services (also in full text on Dialog and Nexis) 
are two examples. 
    The rates for reading the same article may therefore differ
considerably depending on what online service you are using. If you 
are a regular reader, shop around for the best price. 
    Information providers may have subcontractors. The Ziff-Davis 
service Computer Database Plus, a database with full-text articles 
from magazines like Datamation and Wall Street Computer Review, 
depends on them. 
    Datamation pays journalists to write the articles. Ziff-Davis 
pays Datamation for the right to distribute the articles to 
CompuServe's subscribers. CompuServe pays Ziff-Davis part of what 
you pay when reading the text. 


2. Online services

The term "online services" refers to information services  provided 
by computer systems, large or small, to owners of personal 
computers with modems. 
    What is offered, differ by system. It may include access to 
libraries of programs and data, electronic mail, online shopping 
malls, discussion forums, hardware and software vendor support, 
games and entertainment, financial data, stock market quotes, and 
research capabilities.                       
    You do not always need a phone and a modem when "dialing up." 
Some services can be accessed through leased phone lines, amateur 
radio, or other methods. 
    Check out appendix 1 for a list of major services mentioned in 
this book, with addresses, phone numbers, and a short description.
    CompuServe (U.S.A.), Twics (Japan), and Orbit (England) are 
commercial. They charge you for using their services.
    Some online services are priced like magazines and newspapers 
with a flat subscription rate for basic services. You can use this 
part of a service as much as you like within a given period. GEnie, 
CompuServe, BIX, America Online, and Delphi are among those 
offering such pricing options. 
    Other online services charge for 'connect time'. They have a 
rate per hour or minute. 
    MCI Mail uses "no cure, no pay." You only pay to send or read 
mail. To check for unread letters in your mailbox is free. 
    There are all kinds of creative pricing schemes. Some services 
have different rates for access during the day, night and weekends. 
Others have different rates for users living far away. Sometimes 
the remote subscriber pays more, in other cases less than ordinary 
subscribers. 
    Still, most online services are free. This is particularly true 
for the over hundred thousand bulletin board systems around the 
world. The owners of these services often regard them as a hobby, a 
public service, a necessary marketing expense, or do it for other 
reasons. 
    The cost of setting up and operating a bulletin board system 
is low. Consequently, the BBS systems are as varied as the people 
who run them. Each BBS has its own character. 
    My BBS is also free. I consider it an online appendix to this 
book and the articles I write. 
    National Geographic BBS in Washington, D.C., U.S.A. (tel.: +1-
202-775-6738) is run by the magazine of the same name. This board 
is also free. They regard it as a part of their marketing strategy. 
It provides them with input to the editors, and it is an easy way 
of maintaining contacts with schools. 
    Semaforum BBS in Norway is run by a company. Its purpose is 
customer support and to give information to prospective customers. 
The cost is a marketing expense.
    Some large, international online services on the Internet, 
BITNET, and UUCP are almost free. They address research and 
educational institutions and are financed by public funds. These 
services are now being made available to other users at very 
moderate rates. 
    Some users fear that using online services will increase their 
telephone costs dramatically, and especially when using services in 
other countries. This is often unjustified. Read chapter 13 and 15 
for tips about how to keep your communications costs down. 

3. Gateways and networks

CompuServe users select the Computer Database Plus from a menu. 
This prompts CompuServe to dial another online service and lets you 
use this, as if you were still using CompuServe. You hardly notice 
the difference. You are using Computer Database Plus through a 
gateway. 
    CompuServe users searching the IQuest databases get the 
following welcome message: 

      One moment please...

      Connected to 19EASYN

            Welcome to IQuest

      (c) 1991 Telebase Systems, Inc.
         U.S. Patent No. 4,774,655

Through another gateway, CompuServe connects you to the online 
service Telebase Systems, Inc. Telebase lets you go through other 
gateways to search in databases on online services like BRS, 
MEDLINE and NewsNet. 
    While searching, you may get similar progress reports: 

            Dialing BRS
            Connect BRS
            Scanning .... Please wait
            Dialing Medline
            Connect Medline
            Scanning .... Please wait

All the time, your modem is connected to CompuServe. You are 
mentally using IQuest and not other online services. Technically, 
you are going through various gateways to reach the information 
libraries. You pay CompuServe for the privilege. In turn, they pay 
a fee to Telebase, and others. 
    You can read The New York Times on Down Jones News/Retrieval 
through gateways from MCI Mail and GEnie. 
    Accessing information through a gateway is often simpler than 
logging on to several online systems. Calling several systems 
often costs more, and it certainly takes time. 
    Users of BBSes connected to RelayNet or FidoNet can join in 
global discussions. Participants in other countries also call their 
favorite local systems. To the individual user, it looks as if they 
all use the same bulletin board system. 
    The networks that tie these boards together regularly send new 
discussion items to the other participating boards. Write "This is 
not correct!" in a distributed conference on a Norwegian FidoNet 
BBS, and others may soon read your line on San Bernardino BBS in 
Colton (Canada), Wonderland Board in Macau or the HighTech BBS in 
Sidney (Australia). 
    SciLink (Canada) administers a network for distribution of 
conferences between systems using the Caucus software system. 
Participants in Tokyo, Toronto and San Francisco can discuss as 
if they were all logged on to the same online service. 
    The main purpose may not be to make it simpler or cheaper 
for the user. One typical motive is to reduce an online service's 
own communications costs. 
    KIDLINK is a global project for children between 10 - 15 years 
of age. It allows kids to discuss through a system of electronic 
mail.