Don't assume that everyone is using ``rn'' on a Unix machine.  There
are Vaxen running VMS, IBM mainframes, Amigas, and MS-DOS PCs reading
and posting to Usenet.  And, yes, some of them use (shudder) EBCDIC.
Ignore them if you like, but they're out there.

Usenet is not software.
There are dozens of software packages used at various sites to
transport and read Usenet articles.  So no one program or package can
be called ``the Usenet software.''

Software designed to support Usenet traffic can be (and is) used for
other kinds of communication, usually without risk of mixing the two.
Such private communication networks are typically kept distinct from
Usenet by the invention of newsgroup names different from the
universally-recognized ones.

Usenet is not a UUCP network.

UUCP is a protocol (some might say protocol suite, but that's a
technical point) for sending data over point-to-point connections,
typically using dialup modems.  Usenet is only one of the various
kinds of traffic carried via UUCP, and UUCP is only one of the various
transports carrying Usenet traffic.

Well, enough negativity.

Propagation of News

In the old days, when UUCP over long-distance dialup lines was the
dominant means of article transmission, a few well-connected sites
had real influence in determining which newsgroups would be carried
where. Those sites called themselves ``the backbone.''

But things have changed.  Nowadays, even the smallest Internet site
has connectivity the likes of which the backbone admin of yesteryear
could only dream.  In addition, in the U.S., the advent of cheaper
long-distance calls and high-speed modems has made long-distance
Usenet feeds thinkable for smaller companies.  There is only one
pre-eminent UUCP transport site today in the U.S., namely UUNET.  But
UUNET isn't a player in the propagation wars, because it never
refuses any traffic---it gets paid by the minute, after all; to
refuse based on content would jeopardize its legal status as an
enhanced service provider.

All of the above applies to the U.S.  In Europe, different cost
structures favored the creation of strictly controlled hierarchical
organizations with central registries.  This is all very unlike the
traditional mode of U.S. sites (pick a name, get the software, get a
feed, you're on).  Europe's ``benign monopolies'', long uncontested,
now face competition from looser organizations patterned after the
U.S. model.

Group Creation

As discussed above, Usenet is not a democracy.  Nevertheless,
currently the most popular way to create a new newsgroup involves a
``vote'' to determine popular support for (and opposition to) a
proposed newsgroup. Newsgroup Creation, for detailed instructions and
guidelines on the process involved in making a newsgroup.

If you follow the guidelines, it is probable that your group will be
created and will be widely propagated.  However, due to the nature of
Usenet, there is no way for any user to enforce the results of a
newsgroup vote (or any other decision, for that matter).  Therefore,
for your new newsgroup to be propagated widely, you must not only
follow the letter of the guidelines; you must also follow its spirit.
And you must not allow even a whiff of shady dealings or dirty tricks
to mar the vote.

So, you may ask: How is a new user supposed to know anything about the
``spirit'' of the guidelines?  Obviously, she can't.  This fact leads
inexorably to the following recommendation:

If you're a new user, don't try to create a new newsgroup alone.

If you have a good newsgroup idea, then read the news.groups
newsgroup for a while (six months, at least) to find out how things
work.  If you're too impatient to wait six months, then you really
need to learn; read news.groups for a year instead.  If you just
can't wait, find a Usenet old hand to run the vote for you.

Readers may think this advice unnecessarily strict.  Ignore it at your
peril.  It is embarrassing to speak before learning.  It is foolish to
jump into a society you don't understand with your mouth open.  And it
is futile to try to force your will on people who can tune you out
with the press of a key.

If You're Unhappy...
Property rights being what they are, there is no higher authority on
Usenet than the people who own the machines on which Usenet traffic is
carried.  If the owner of the machine you use says, ``We will not
carry alt.sex on this machine,'' and you are not happy with
that order, you have no Usenet recourse.  What can we outsiders do,
after all?

That doesn't mean you are without options.  Depending on the nature
of your site, you may have some internal political recourse.  Or you
might find external pressure helpful.  Or, with a minimal investment,
you can get a feed of your own from somewhere else. Computers capable
of taking Usenet feeds are down in the $500 range now, Unix-capable
boxes are going for under $2000, and there are at least two Unix
lookalikes in the $100 price range.

No matter what, appealing to ``Usenet'' won't help.  Even if those who
read such an appeal regarding system administration are sympathetic to
your cause, they will almost certainly have even less influence at
your site than you do.

By the same token, if you don't like what some user at another site is
doing, only the administrator and/or owner of that site have any
authority to do anything about it.  Persuade them that the user in
question is a problem for them, and they might do something (if they
feel like it).  If the user in question is the administrator or owner
of the site from which he or she posts, forget it; you can't win.
Arrange for your newsreading software to ignore articles from him or
her if you can, and chalk one up to experience.

The History of Usenet (The ABCs)

In the beginning, there were conversations, and they were good.  Then
came Usenet in 1979, shortly after the release of V7 Unix with UUCP;
and it was better.  Two Duke University grad students in North
Carolina, Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis, thought of hooking computers
together to exchange information with the Unix community.  Steve
Bellovin, a grad student at the University of North Carolina, put
together the first version of the news software using shell scripts
and installed it on the first two sites: unc and duke. At the
beginning of 1980 the network consisted of those two sites and phs
(another machine at Duke), and was described at the January 1980
Usenix conference in Boulder, CO. {The Usenix conferences are
semi-annual meetings where members  of the Usenix Association, a
group of Unix enthusiasts, meet and trade notes.} Steve Bellovin
later rewrote the scripts into C programs, but they were never
released beyond unc and duke.  Shortly thereafter, Steve Daniel did
another implementation in the C programming language for public
distribution.  Tom Truscott made further modifications, and this
became the ``A'' news release.

In 1981 at the University of California at Berkeley, grad student Mark
Horton and high school student Matt Glickman rewrote the news software
to add functionality and to cope with the ever increasing volume of
news---``A'' news was intended for only a few articles per group per
day.  This rewrite was the ``B'' news version.  The first public
release was version 2.1 in 1982; all versions before 2.1 were
considered in beta test.  As The Net grew, the news software was
expanded and modified.  The last version maintained and released
primarily by Mark was 2.10.1.

Rick Adams, then at the Center for Seismic Studies, took over
coordination of the maintenance and enhancement of the news software
with the 2.10.2 release in 1984.  By this time, the increasing volume
of news was becoming a concern, and the mechanism for moderated groups
was added to the software at 2.10.2.  Moderated groups were inspired
by ARPA mailing lists and experience with other bulletin board
systems.  In late 1986, version 2.11 of news was released, including a
number of changes to support a new naming structure for newsgroups,
enhanced batching and compression, enhanced ihave/sendme control
messages, and other features.  The current release of news is 2.11,
patchlevel 19.

A new version of news, becoming known as ``C'' news, has been
developed at the University of Toronto by Geoff Collyer and Henry
Spencer.  This version is a rewrite of the lowest levels of news to
increase article processing speed, decrease article expiration
processing and improve the reliability of the news system through
better locking, etc.  The package was released to The Net in the
autumn of 1987.  For more information, see the paper News Need Not Be
Slow, published in the Winter 1987 Usenix Technical Conference
proceedings.

Usenet software has also been ported to a number of platforms, from
the Amiga and IBM PCs all the way to minicomputers and mainframes.

Hierarchies
Newsgroups are organized according to their specific areas of
concentration.  Since the groups are in a tree structure, the
various areas are called hierarchies.  There are seven major categories:

 
comp
Topics of interest to both computer professionals and
hobbyists, including topics in computer science, software sources, and
information on hardware and software systems.

misc
Group addressing themes not easily classified into any of the other
headings or which incorporate themes from multiple categories.
Subjects include fitness, job-hunting, law, and investments.

sci
Discussions marked by special knowledge relating to research in or
application of the established sciences.

 soc
Groups primarily addressing social issues and socializing.  Included
are discussions related to many different world cultures.

 talk
Groups largely debate-oriented and tending to feature long
discussions without resolution and without appreciable amounts of
generally useful information.

 news
Groups concerned with the news network, group maintenance, and software.

 rec
Groups oriented towards hobbies and recreational activities

These ``world'' newsgroups are (usually) circulated around the entire
Usenet---this implies world-wide distribution.  Not all groups
actually enjoy such wide distribution, however.  The European Usenet
and Eunet sites take only a selected subset of the more ``technical''
groups, and controversial ``noise'' groups are often not carried by many
sites in the U.S. and Canada (these groups are primarily under the talk
and soc classifications).  Many sites do not carry some or all of
the comp.binaries groups because of the typically large size of
the posts in them (being actual executable programs).

Also available are a number of ``alternative'' hierarchies:

 
 alt
True anarchy; anything and everything can and does appear;
subjects include sex, the Simpsons, and privacy.

 gnu
Groups concentrating on interests and software with the GNU
Project of the Free Software Foundation. For further info on what the
FSF is, FSF.

 biz
Business-related groups.

Moderated vs Unmoderated

Some newsgroups insist that the discussion remain focused and
on-target; to serve this need, moderated groups came to be.  All
articles posted to a moderated group get mailed to the group's
moderator.  He or she periodically (hopefully sooner than later)
reviews the posts, and then either posts them individually to Usenet,
or posts a composite digest of the articles for the past day or
two.  This is how many mailing list gateways work (for example, the
Risks Digest).

news.groups & news.announce.newgroups

Being a good net.citizen includes being involved in the continuing
growth and evolution of the Usenet system.  One part of this
involvement includes following the discussion in the groups
news.groups and the notes in news.announce.newgroups. It is there
that discussion goes on about the creation of new groups and
destruction of inactive ones.  Every person on Usenet is allowed and
encouraged to vote on the creation of a newsgroup.

How Usenet Works

The transmission of Usenet news is entirely cooperative.  Feeds are
generally provided out of good will and the desire to distribute news
everywhere.  There are places which provide feeds for a fee (e.g.
UUNET), but for the large part no exchange of money is involved.

There are two major transport methods, UUCP and NNTP.  The first is
mainly modem-based and involves the normal charges for telephone
calls.  The second, NNTP, is the primary method for distributing news
over the Internet.

With UUCP, news is stored in batches on a site until the
neighbor calls to receive the articles, or the feed site happens to
call.  A list of groups which the neighbor wishes to receive is
maintained on the feed site.  The Cnews system compresses its batches,
which can dramatically reduce the transmission time necessary for a
relatively heavy newsfeed.

NNTP, on the other hand, offers a little more latitude with how news
is sent.  The traditional store-and-forward method is, of course,
available.  Given the ``real-time'' nature of the Internet, though,
other methods have been devised.  Programs now keep constant
connections with their news neighbors, sending news nearly
instantaneously, and can handle dozens of simultaneous feeds, both
incoming and outgoing.

The transmission of a Usenet article is centered around the unique
Message-ID: header.  When an NNTP site offers an article to a
neighbor, it says it has that specific Message ID.  If the neighbor
finds it hasn't received the article yet, it tells the feed to send it
through; this is repeated for each and every article that's waiting
for the neighbor.  Using unique IDs helps prevent a system from
receiving five copies of an article from each of its five news
neighbors, for example.

Further information on how Usenet works with relation to the various
transports is available in the documentation for the Cnews and NNTP
packages, as well as in RFC-1036, the Standard for Interchange of
USENET Messages and RFC-977, Network News Transfer Protocol: A
Proposed Standard for the Stream-Based Transmission of News.  The
RFCs do tend to be rather dry reading, particularly to the new user.

 
Mail Gateways

A natural progression is for Usenet news and electronic mailing lists
to somehow become merged---which they have, in the form of news
gateways.  Many mailing lists are set up to ``reflect'' messages not
only to the readership of the list, but also into a newsgroup.
Likewise, posts to a newsgroup can be sent to the moderator of the
mailing list, or to the entire mailing list.  Some examples of this in
action are comp.risks (the Risks Digest) and
comp.dcom.telecom (the Telecom Digest).

This method of propagating mailing list traffic has helped solve the
problem of a single message being delivered to a number of people at
the same site---instead, anyone can just subscribe to the group.
Also, mailing list maintenance is lowered substantially, since the
moderators don't have to be constantly removing and adding users to
and from the list.  Instead, the people can read and not read the
newsgroup at their leisure.

from ``Dear Emily Postnews'' by Brad Templeton
Usenet ``Netiquette''

There are many traditions with Usenet, not the least of which is
dubbed netiquette---being polite and considerate of others.  If
you follow a few basic guidelines, you, and everyone that reads your
posts, will be much happier in the long run.

 Signatures

At the end of most articles is a small blurb called a person's
signature.  In Unix this file is named .signature in the
person's login directory---it will vary for other operating systems.
It exists to provide information about how to get in touch with the